You want to put it on?
Okay, we're talking to Fred Schreiber.
Okay, I'll just put this over here.
Yeah, if you have questions, I will tell you if they're answered in my autobiographical schedule.
If they're not, I will answer them now.
I'm sure, you know, when you came here.
Yes, not a year, but it was 1953.
How old were you?
I was 17, a few months past 17.
So you hadn't really attended university at all?
That is all answered in Maya Tabaga.
Believe me when I tell you.
Okay, but what were your intentions for yourself at that point?
I'm only going to repeat what you need to read.
I was not educated when I came here.
I had gone to elementary school, and I quit when I was 14.
I worked as an apprentice tailor in Paris.
But, as I said, this is all what my autobiographical sketch is about.
Well, I know you went to Harvard.
Much later.
Well, what did you do when you first came here?
I worked as a shipping clerk.
for several years on the 47th Street.
I hope I'm not rushing you through that.
No, no.
A lemon is optional.
It just looks nice, though.
Yes.
Some cheese and pepper for you, sir.
I'd like a little cheese, I guess.
Yeah, it's very nice.
I worked as a shipping clerk.
Cheese?
Stay right in front of me.
Cheese on your veggies, you're all right?
No, thank you.
You worked as a shipping clerk?
Uh-huh.
Minimum wage job here in New York?
In New York.
From 53 to 1960.
Seven years.
Yes.
So from the age of approximately about 17 to 24.
Yes, correct.
And then from the age of 22 to the age of 24, I went to high school at night.
I started high school when I was about 22 and graduated from high school at night and then went on to college.
I went to Queens College City University of New York and then got a Woodrow Wilson fellowship and I went to Harvard Graduate School where I obtained a PhD in classics in 1970 and I taught for
After that or while you were doing it?
No, no.
After I got my PhD, I taught at Herbert Lehman College, City University of New York.
Became an associate professor.
I was granted tenure.
And then I quit to go into my own business.
The reasons for that are very... I myself don't understand them.
I think it's sort of a midlife crisis.
When I went into the business, I was about 42, 43.
Interesting.
Were you unhappy teaching?
No.
I may say to myself, I was a very popular teacher.
Very good.
But I think when you read my autobiography after the sketch, you will see that the PhD was very important to me because I was uneducated.
And I admired education because it's something that I didn't have and that was another world.
And when I realized that I've wasted all these years, that I could obtain an education, I wanted a PhD even though I didn't really know what it meant.
I just wanted to be called doctor.
It was a goal.
What I didn't realize is that the goal was what I really wanted.
I wanted a PhD and I didn't think any further than that.
So after teaching for seven or eight years, I realized one day, you know, this is not really what I want to do for the rest of my life.
All I wanted was to make a PhD so I could prove something to myself.
What do I really want to do?
Well, I want to be with books all the time.
And also one element is that I like to be my own boss.
And in a university environment, in an academic environment, you have to answer to many people.
You have to do things that you may not want to do.
And that everybody will do with teaching.
Yes, exactly.
So I think that after I got tenure, I was a little burnt out because there were no more challenges.
I had gotten my associate professorship.
I had gotten my tenure.
I knew the next step was going to be full professorship.
It was not a challenge.
I knew it was just going to come along.
Was the livelihood satisfactory?
Well, I didn't make a lot of money, but it was the most money I ever made in my life.
You know, I was making something like $25,000 a year, which to me was like, coming from where I came from, shipping hurt.
It was like tremendous.
But of course, what you make as a dealer, it doesn't compare to what you made from the professor.
So the motivation wasn't cheap?
It wasn't money.
Was that something to prove yourself financially?
No, absolutely not.
Never occurred to me.
I think it's just that I wanted a change.
I wanted to do... I was a collector all my life.
That's interesting.
And... Here's how we're doing over here.
Can I get you another go on some way?
No, I'm set, thanks.
Okay, very good.
So...
And I wanted to be in my hobbies 24 hours a day.
What did you collect?
I've always collected something, and as I mentioned in my schedule, I started with comic books and stamps, whatever I could afford.
And my big argument is that you don't have to have money to be a collector.
You're a collector or you're not a collector.
And it bothers me when people say, if I had money, I would be a collector.
That makes no sense.
That's absurd.
Totally.
And these people usually have much more money than I have.
So either you're a collector or you're not a collector.
There is no stigma attached to not being a collector.
The analogy I use in my sketch is either you have the flu virus or you don't have it.
There's no stigma attached to it.
And I happened to have the collector's virus.
It's like being a little bit pregnant.
Yes.
That's right.
So I collected... As I advanced in my life's situation, I would collect something more sophisticated, something I could afford better.
So for a long time I collected the books illustrated by Arthur Rackett.
That was my big love.
And then when I went to Harvard, one of my special interests for the PhD was Aristophanes, so I began to collect Aristophanes, which involved me with early books.
And so when I went into my own business, since I had a PhD in classics and that's all I knew, I went into
Early books, or rather, the first catalog I put out was used books in the classics, 20th century, 19th century.
When was this?
Well, I started part-time.
I started about 1971.
I was born in 1935.
So I began to dabble as a hobby with used books.
And I got more and more involved in it.
And eventually decided that's what I would do.
Full time.
And I began full time in 1978.
So I was 43.
And how did you go about finding stuff?
Oh, I went over, well, I bought at auction.
Also, because I had some insights in certain books, I was able to buy from other dealers points that they missed in certain books.
My big strength, I think, in the book business, if I have anything to contribute, is the ability to do research.
And you can uncover some very important things when you read the languages and you are trained as a researcher, academic researcher.
You can make finds.
Anything come to mind, specifically?
Yes.
I know it's hard to ask this myself.
No, no, no, I... What I'll do is I'll give you a description of the book that I... My first catalogue, the first important catalogue, in other words, by important I mean the first catalogue... Let me go back for a second.
Before going into the business full time, what I decided to do is try it out.
And I took a leave of absence from teaching for one year.
So you didn't cross the Wubafone immediately?
No.
I took a leave of absence.
I played it safe.
And we put all our savings into stock, my wife and I. I mean, everything we had was a big gamble.
But I figured this way.
If it doesn't work out, I'll go back to teaching next year.
And I've lost nothing.
If it works out, I'll quit.
and I'll go into the book business.
So, we put all our money into this catalogue.
Did you buy very shrewdly?
Well, I didn't know until the catalogue would come out.
It was a gamble.
Although the gambling element is something that feels to me too, you know.
It's incredible.
Yeah.
So, I'll tell you in a second what the fine was in that catalogue.
In any case, the catalogue did very well.
I had asked around booksellers, what constitutes success when they put out a catalogue?
And they said, well, if a catalogue sells 40%, it's very good.
How soon?
I guess within a month or two of it.
I would think so.
Oh, it's broken even, probably.
You mark up this 50%.
Yeah.
40% of the books and the value is supposedly a big success.
So that's what I was aiming for.
Put out this catalogue, and it sold maybe 60%.
So to me that was success.
However, I couldn't decide.
Suppose my next catalogue doesn't do as well, and I lost my tenure, I lost all my benefits.
I mean, this was a big...
You haven't lost these things yet?
No.
I was supposed to call the chairman of my department to tell him in April 1979 whether I was coming back in September or not.
And I couldn't call him because I couldn't decide, you know?
So he called me.
I was in April 1979.
Fred, are you coming back in September?
And I knew that
The answer I was going to be given, yes or no, was going to seal my fate.
If I said yes, then I would never be a bookseller.
I would always be a professor.
If I said no, I would lose tenure.
I mean, forget about it, career.
This is a momentous moment.
So he calls me up.
Are you coming back in September?
And I couldn't answer.
But I heard a voice in me.
I was in the kitchen, I remember, on the phone, and I said, no, I'm not coming back.
And as though it was somebody else talking.
It wasn't me.
I just heard, no, I'm not coming back.
And that's it.
From that day on, I was a bookseller.
Did you discuss it with your wife at that point?
She was very encouraging.
If I hadn't, if she wasn't, I wouldn't have done it.
Even though I have.
Because I'm very diffident,
I would never have been able to make a decision, but my wife has more confidence in me than I do.
So, with her help... I quit a job five and a half years ago.
I had two small daughters at the time, and I was six months prior by 20 years.
You're not regretting it.
Exactly.
Well, that's the same thing with me.
I'm 53 now.
I did this at 48.
I wish I'd done it when I was 42.
Same age as you.
I had a daughter.
I had a mortgage.
So it wasn't easy.
But I must admit that my wife gets all the credit for any success I may have had.
Read the acknowledgements in my book and I say,
I'll send you this Boston Globe piece.
Because it wasn't just the fact that she says do it, it's the fact that she gives you moral permission to do it.
You have to believe that.
There's only one person in the world who thought I was doing the right thing by quitting my job, and that was my wife.
My parents who helped us, my brother, all these people thought I was nuts.
I was getting paid very well.
I was a book reviewer, a journalist, getting paid well, full benefits.
And then I said, you know, I'm going to be a chump if I do this for the rest of my life.
I've got it in me to write a good book, and I've got the ability to do it, and I'll forever wonder what I did with my life.
And my wife, God bless her, should read.
You know, there's a whole bunch of people we call
I would have, if I could, but we said we could.
We just did it.
And don't be afraid to fail, too.
Yes.
That's part of the equation.
It can go either way.
There's no guarantees in this world.
You know, John Chancellor, who died, I knew him in his obituary, I don't know if it was in the Times' obituary, but he battled cancer for some time.
But the final quote in the obituary was, John Chancellor said,
He quoted somebody else.
He said, if you want to make God laugh, tell him your plans.
Think about that.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Tell him the way you've got your life figured out, how it's going to go, how everything's going to turn out.
Well, you know, the cliché life is what happens when you make other plans.
Yeah.
Life is what happens to you when you have made other plans.
So we're kind of in sync here.
Yeah, yeah.
I respect that so much.
So let's get back then.
You're telling me about this first catalogue.
Yeah, okay.
It kind of has a sleeper title in it, apparently.
Well, it did very well.
But one item... How did you track Tesla's value?
I bought the library directory.
I sent to every library that I could think of.
I had no idea.
Just a hit and miss.
I had no private collectors.
And I advertised and I got some names.
One of the books that did very well in the catalog, by very well meaning that I got about ten orders for it, which is very unusual.
And no book ever gets that kind of... You love it if you get one.
Which tells you probably had the first one.
Yes.
But, I mean, the main thing is I made my money in it, and I'm not worried about it.
Well, I'll tell you what it was.
It was an incunable.
And it was a theological incunable.
I'll give you a clipping of the description so you'll know what it is.
And it was known that the book contains, it was in Latin, that it contained a few English phrases.
So I bought it for that.
Because it was unusual.
I paid $1,800 for it.
I'm telling you the price because it's important.
I remember I was making $25,000 a year or something.
It was a big money for me.
I decided that the English sounded very biblical to me.
The book was printed in 1480.
could it be quotations of the Bible?
The context was quoting students at Cambridge or Oxford swearing their oaths by Christ's blogging, you know, as in Old English.
So I checked and checked and sure enough I found it was a quotation from the New Testament.
When was
When was the earliest printing of any portion of the Bible in English?
Well, this might be it.
So my heading was possibly the earliest printed quotation of the Bible in English.
I made the book, I think, 4250 or 4500, you'll see it in the clipping.
Because, I mean, I wrote a very long description proving my point.
And I began to get orders for that book.
I couldn't believe it.
The first order came from the bookseller, Larry Whitton.
You know him?
He's dead now.
And I began to get orders from every bookseller in the world, you know?
And some libraries.
But do you think they knew the book or were they buying it on the screen?
No, because you see, I didn't have... What I was lacking is... The biography?
No, I didn't know the business.
I didn't know what sold.
I didn't know...
They were the veterans who knew that a book like this can sell very easily.
I didn't know.
I was just... Just because of the things you found?
Yeah.
What you did is you identified the selling points.
But I didn't know... Yeah, but I didn't know that.
I didn't know if I would get any orders, but these guys knew.
They'd know the market.
I didn't know the market.
But you discovered something about the books that made it attractive.
Yes.
So Larry Whitten buys it.
Did he call immediately?
Yes, he was the first to call.
Puts it in his catalogue, with my description, about three months later, I can show you that too, $16,500.
No, that's okay.
I mean, don't begrudging, because he knew the market.
I mean, he knew the market, which I didn't know.
He had knowledgeable power in this business, and he knew something I didn't know.
And the book is now at the Pierpon Morgan Library.
That book?
Yeah.
For very costly.
I mean, I didn't sell it to the Morgan, but he did at $60,500.
Well, just to go back and use a little hindsight and then also project it.
Do you think it was your description that got it into the Morgan Library?
Yes, of course.
It was what you had discovered about this.
Yes.
Otherwise, it might have just been another, just another inculable.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
But you discovered something in there in English.
Yes.
That related to the New Testament.
If I had described the book and not, if I had not found what I just, if I had not made a discovery and had mentioned it in my description, I don't know if I would have gotten any orders.
But these people knew.
I mean, perhaps the earliest quotation, you know,
Do you remember the title of the book?
Yes, it's a book by a man named Michael of Hungary, but I'll give you the flipping.
I love the story.
This is a great story.
This reinforced my feeling, well, I know how to do research, but what I don't know is I don't know the market, I don't know the business, I don't know who buys what, I don't know what sells, and this only comes with experience.
And gradually I learned that too.
I don't know everything yet, but... How do you feel when something like that happens?
Wonderful, right?
Yes, especially since I had taken such a gamble, it reinforces your choice, you know?
I mean... Do you remember where you found the book?
Yes.
Without naming names?
Yeah, I bought it from a dealer, a small dealer.
who undoubtedly had sold it for $1,800.
He knew there was English in it.
He did his work.
How did it occur to you that this might be the first reference?
What about your educational background?
Where did the element of perception come in?
I can't retrace my thought pattern at the time.
Just a hunch.
And when I found the quote in the Bible, I said, this is it.
And then I decided to capitalize on it and see if that sort of thing impresses anyone.
I didn't know.
I was working with that.
Did you try and find prior printed versions?
Yes.
How did you do that?
Well, I checked every caxton that had been printed.
and the possibility of them being any biblical quotation.
And the only one I found, the only possibility, was later than 1480.
You'll see all this in my mind.
So anything after 1480 is quite irrelevant.
It doesn't matter.
Yeah, exactly.
If you could find something before 1480, then my theory was shocked.
That's right.
But obviously these dealers who had been in the business for a long time... They responded.
Yeah, they knew.
I mean...
I made my money.
I'm very happy.
I mean, I made more than double, so I'm not begrudging.
Larry sold to the Morgan Library, or Eric ultimately got to the Morgan Library?
No, he sold it to the Morgan Library.
So they paid $16,500?
$16,500.
I'll show you his capital.
So I have to believe that the people there understood the odds.
Well, I don't know on what basis he sold it to them, because I didn't really have any relationships with librarians.
I didn't know what they looked for.
I was working in a sort of darkness.
A vacuum.
Yeah, yeah.
And, you know, but once I said no, and I'm not coming back in September, then I began to get a little... I became...
much more concerned with the business aspect, how to survive.
It's good to be a scholar, but that's not going to... I understand.
I have a good week this week, but I have to make a buck next week as a freelancer.
Great.
The other thing that happened, and I don't know if this should be mentioned... I'll try it.
I'm not sure that I want to.
When my catalog came out, I got a call from H.P.
Krause.
Not from him personally, but from Roland Holter.
And I don't want the name mentioned.
H.P.
would like to see you.
So, I went there.
Roland took me up to H.P.
And, okay Roland, you can leave us now.
Very nice catalog you put up, Mr. Schweitzer.
Thank you very much.
Now remember, it's my first catalog.
I just gave up tenure and I'm just embarking on a new life.
You're a kid.
I don't care if you're 42.
Yeah, exactly.
I'm starting with all kinds of questions and uncertainties.
I mean, in my mind, am I going to survive in this?
Did I make a big mistake?
Is it going to happen again?
He said, Roland, take Mr. Schreiber to the third floor to show him the manuscripts.
Maybe he wants to sell me things, he doesn't realize I'm a poor schlep, I don't have any money, you know.
So Roland shows me, and then he brings me down again, and HB says to Roland, now you can leave us alone, Roland.
Did you like my manuscripts?
I said, yes.
I had no idea what he was after.
Would you like to help me describe them?
So I said, what do you mean?
I'm offering you a job.
I said...
working for H.P.
Trials.
I was thrilled.
I couldn't answer.
Did this also involve giving up your business?
We didn't come to that.
I'm just telling you exactly how it does.
I go, I pay good.
He says.
Automatically, I said, how much?
I don't know why.
That's a very clear question.
I'm assuming that he must have looked up what an associate professor makes
and a city university.
He says, $25,000?
$28,000, he says, without me asking anything.
And I'm going, well, maybe more, he says.
Now I'm getting into a range where I've never been before, you know, as far as salary is concerned.
And it's seductive.
Of course, my head is like going like this.
So I said, well, think about it, he says.
So I went home and told my wife, H.P.
Krasso offered me a job today.
Really?
He's willing to pay me like, he said 28, but he said maybe more, which means like 30, you know, I've never made that kind of money.
My wife, who is very much planted on the ground, is not emotional like I am, says, why did you want to go into this business?
Why?
be my own boss.
That's it.
Do you want to work for H.P.
Krause or do you want to be your own boss?
So I wrote a letter to H.P.
Krause.
Mr. Krause, I was extremely flattered and honored by your offer, but as I'm sure you will understand, the reason that I gave up my academic career is that I wanted to be my own person and boss.
And even though I'm very flattered, I cannot accept.
And I received no answer.
But a few months later, there was a big party at H.P.
Krauss for his 75th birthday.
And you were invited?
And he invited three dealers.
I mean, I shouldn't say three, maybe four.
Letha Pauper, that is Felix Oriens, Jacques Vellocoup, Bernard Bresslauer, and me.
and i like to think it's because he respected my response i don't know i'm just reading into it well but that was it hey he didn't know you at all except for that one yeah but that's something i prefer this is something well i don't want to mention we'll talk about it it's a wonderful story i don't see anything wrong with it at all and there's nothing disparaging about course he offered you a job it's funny because when i came down again
Roland said, did he offer you a job?
He said, how much do you need?
I said, I... I wouldn't get into it.
No, I said to him, I didn't mention that, because I don't know how much... Was he married to Marianne?
No, a long time ago.
This was 1979.
Right after my catalog came out.
The first... You mentioned books.
All it did was reinforce my decision.
I felt that I had made a good choice in going into the book business,
that even if my catalogue went, I still had a job with a big dealer, you know.
Sir, can I take these away for you?
I'm finished.
I'd like some more water in there.
Sure, I can do that for you.
You'd like some coffee, cappuccino, espresso, dessert?
Dessert?
Maybe coffee.
Yeah, I'll have a coffee share.
Sure.
The one yesterday was very good.
Very good.
I still feel it.
Good.
Excellent.
Well, we'll try to keep you going until tomorrow then.
Okay.
Where were we?
Before I forget, even before I came on our tape recorder, I said, do you think that's a fair assumption that this wave of Everbury booksellers did have the kind of impact that Roger started suggesting?
I think so, but I'm not very good at analyzing those movements.
Yes, because they brought with them not only stock of old books, but also a European tradition for the American book business.
That's very important.
Yeah.
Do you think that you practiced in the European tradition?
Yes, because what happened with me is that I read
And I learned my business really from reading catalogues by people like William Salak.
Do you know the name?
It's in my book.
I would read their catalogues and learn.
That's where I really formed my own style.
I mean, I have my own style.
Everyone has his own style.
But I was very influenced by their catalogues.
So when I suggest to you on the way over that maybe a review of the hook seller's catalogues might be an interesting exercise, you would agree with that?
Absolutely.
Yes.
Because there is a level of expertise.
And not just the prices, you can take those or you can leave them.
But what does the person tell me about this book?
What's important about this book?
What makes this book so important that it should be included in this lesson?
Why somebody would want it?
Well, my own feeling about a book seller's catalog, I had my own, you know, in ancient Greek there was a quality that you called arete.
or arete, which was, it can't be translated into English, but it's, in older school books they usually translate by virtue, the virtue of a thing, what makes something, what it is.
For instance, the arete of a racing horse, the speed, that's what makes a racing horse.
What is the arete of a soldier?
The courage.
What is the arete of a booksellers catalogue?
And my answer is, a booksellers catalogue arete is the ability to sell books.
So don't say more than you have to, don't say less, say just what you need to sell the book.
Don't show off your knowledge, because you're just refuddling the issue.
And so what I try to do, and it doesn't come easy, I used to say too much at the beginning,
Now, I just try to trim it down to the essentials.
What is this book about?
What is the point that we sell it?
Well, that justifies the price, too.
Yes, of course.
So that's part of the area?
Yeah, yeah, yes.
And how would you spell it?
What would it be in English?
A-R-E-T-E.
Oh, so I know that word.
Yeah.
A-R-E-T-E.
The last E is an eta, so it's a long E. Thank you.
Anyway, that's my feeling about, so there are certain catalogues, without mentioning names, I see pages and pages of nonsense.
They don't do anything, it's because the book is bad, they don't know what to say about it, so they're trying to make it, to fluff it up.
But if you read between the lines, you'll realize,
How many catalogues have you done?
Well, starting with number 7, which was my first important one, I just finished my 33rd, so from 7 to 33.
Would you say that you sell primarily as an institution?
Yes, my big customer, or rather my major customers are institutions, some private collectors, other dealers of course,
but mostly institutional collectors.
Do you work with librarians in terms of collection development?
Do you talk informally on the phone?
Yes.
I realize it's kind of selling, but also explaining to them why a certain item... I personally am not too good at phone skills.
I try to avoid it.
I'm not good at selling face-to-face.
I like to describe it in my catalogue and let people decide for themselves.
I'm not good at selling.
It's a big problem.
It's a skill that I lack, I envy it, but I can't do it because I get too self-conscious.
I'm able to sell other people's stuff, you know, but if it's my own, I just can't do it.
But that's a personal thing.
Go back to your home.
Would you say you have a passion for books?
Where does that come from?
Is that something that's inherited from your family?
No.
You will find out in my biological sketch.
I speak a lot about it.
The talk I gave at the Philo Bigelon Club, which is this one, except in this one I've added a few personal things, I called My Life with Books, How One Thing Leads to Another.
But as I said, I added a few, I filled in a few gaps because they could have been too personal for all deliveries.
So I've included them for your sake so that you know where I come from.
But the decision to leave teaching, was it a decision to leave teaching and become a bookseller?
Yeah.
Or was it a decision to leave teaching and to do something for yourself?
No, be a bookseller.
I was collecting Aristophanies in a very big way, and the one book I didn't have and I lost it afterwards, the first edition, which is the oldie in 1498.
You lost that?
No, I couldn't afford it.
I was teaching, you know, so how could I buy something?
It was offered to me, I was still teaching at $3,500.
I mean, this is a tremendous fortune for someone teaching, you know.
A lot of money to earn.
Yeah, but I wanted it so badly.
Only a collector can understand how much I wanted it.
And I didn't have the money, so what I decided to do is sell some of my own duplicates.
And I raised the money somehow.
But the selling process introduced me to the world of bookselling, to other booksellers.
I made friends.
And I liked what I saw.
I found it more thrilling to be with booksellers and antiquarian books than I did with my colleagues at Herbert Lehman College.
Also, certain things happened at the college.
We were doing very badly in the department as far as enrollment was concerned.
So, the classics department was threatened with having to teach immediate English.
At the idea of having to teach immediate English, which is not what I wanted to do when I got my PhD at Harvard in classical theology, I sort of began to feel
there were several factors you see there was that the idea that i wasn't totally happy after college just some of the students i mean i had some very good students that could have been at Harvard but the majority of them were not that good and i didn't feel challenged i felt
I have to water down my lectures to appeal to the lowest common denominator.
I don't want to do that.
It's not fair to the best students.
I became disenchanted with the academic world.
When I published things, my colleagues were... I mean, you hardly ever read what your colleagues write.
You just ask, how long is it?
When I publish a catalog, I know people read it.
And in fact, when I published this catalog, I remember a very famous professor of classics, who wouldn't have given me the time of day, wrote me a very nice letter about my description of some Greek books.
Oh, isn't that nice?
I mean, he was very famous.
Bernard Knox or somebody else?
Exactly.
How do you know that?
It was Bernard Knox.
I wrote him, you know, when I was writing A Gentle Madness.
Yeah.
and he wrote me a beautiful letter.
It's amazing that you should mention it.
It was exactly who it was.
I just respect his translation.
I mean, I read Greek plays with great pleasure.
Actually, I'll go ahead now.
I've taken a seminar with him at Harvard.
He had been visiting, taking a seminar on a play of Euripides.
And that was it.
I mean, he didn't remember me or anything.
But then I put out this catalogue and I sent a copy to the academy in Washington, the, what is it called?
I forget, you know, the... No, no, he was the head of, you know, in Washington.
I, for some reason, not being a classicist anymore, I've forgotten all the things.
Anyway, he wrote me a very nice note about
some description I made of a Greek book.
I know that if I had written an article, he wouldn't have seen it, he wouldn't have cared.
I thought it was very ironic that not being a scholar anymore, I was getting responses from scholars.
Would you say, in a satisfying sort of way, there is pride of authorship then?
Yes, absolutely.
I spent a long time researching.
You worry about the writing, the syntax?
Yeah, my writing is very stiff.
What I worry most about is, and I hope this doesn't sound self-serving, I don't mean it that way, I want to be able to tell the truth about a book.
And you'll be surprised how many people don't say anything to sell a book.
And I want to tell the truth about the book, not distorting a fact, not exaggerating something, but still make it very appealing.
And that I find very challenging.
Any other wonderful anecdotes?
You mentioned how the research is brought into play in the very first catalog.
That's a wonderful story.
Well, I tell a very good anecdote in my autobiographical sketch about the dealer who really taught me a big lesson.
Emil Offenbacher.
But you'll read the anecdote.
It's a very good one.
Is he one of the other great books?
Yes.
I was looking for, when he died in 1990, there was a service for him at the Grollet Club.
I mean, not by the Grollet Club, but it took place at the Grollet Club.
And I was one of the speakers.
And I wrote, I retold an anecdote that he had told me.
And I was looking for it, and I can't find it anymore.
Is this Stefan Pryor, do you think, at the Grollet Club?
I don't, it has nothing to do with the Grollet Club.
But his wife, his widow,
It's someone you should speak to.
She's around, huh?
Yeah.
How would I find out about him, his biography and stuff like that?
But she will have the sketch, because you wrote a biographical sketch.
She's here in New York someplace?
She's in Queens, if she's still there.
Unless she moved to her home in... It's O-F-F-E-N?
O-F-F-E-N-B-A-C-H-E-R.
That's what I have.
And if you want to know her address, you can call Jonathan Hill.
Do you know the name?
Oh, I'll find out for you.
Who is it?
He's a dealer, a colleague of mine.
But I can find out for you.
What was his significance, would you say, just to go off on a tangent?
Well, he... You see, I'm still... I was going to say... No, I was going to say he majored in... He specialized in... You see, all that... Still in college.
He specialized in history of science.
He had been a bookseller in Paris in the 30s.
He was an emigre.
But the story about him, which I found absolutely fascinating, the one that he told, I'll make it very brief.
When he came to America, he didn't have a job, so he worked in a factory.
And all he had to do all day was to watch a certain machine going up and down and make sure that it didn't stop.
I mean, for a guy with his intelligence, you know.
How's it you?
Are you sure?
Yes, sir.
Okay, please.
This is unusual.
I always pay for people here, so you're probably very sure.
Certainly, yeah.
Thank you.
You just talk.
I'm just trying to find a way to get a card.
Okay.
I like to put all these in America.
Anyway, so he was... All he had to do in his factory was to watch this machine another stop.
Yeah.
He was not a tremendously educated person.
He was very well-read.
He knew... I mean, he was a... He knew music.
He knew science.
He knew literature.
One of those really civilized people.
And here's this man with this brain.
who has to watch the machine all day to make sure it doesn't stop.
One day it stopped.
He was panicked.
He felt totally inadequate.
So he goes to his foreman, and this is the story I told of his, to the foreman, and the foreman comes over, takes this pipe out of his mouth, knocks on the machine at a certain point, and the thing starts going again.
And Emil felt so inadequate, this man just made him look like a fool.
He was panicked and this guy just knew where to knock with his pipe.
So he felt absolutely stupid.
He came home, he was depressed and not even good at this.
And then he got a catalog from Swan Gallery one day, this was in the early 40s, and he saw a book in it.
and uh it would it was an incurable with a woodcut described as a lady with a big dog and he knew from his knowledge in books that this wasn't a lady with a dog it was saint jerome and the lion and that the woodcut was by durer and he decided you know go to the auction and buy it you know put lady with a big yeah you know so he bought the book and he couldn't believe it he got it for next to nothing and he felt that
this is great you know and he felt when he bought that book and recognized something that nobody else had seen that he had taken his pipe and knocked on this machine that's how he put it that he was able to be like his foreman in his own field that he was master of the field and i find that so um
Inspiring, you know?
So that's the story I told.
But it's in his... Can we do just a little more coffee?
Actually, Mr. I could probably have to go back pretty soon.
Did you get down on the recorder with more coffee for you, too, as well, sir?
Are you going to have some more coffee?
No.
Okay.
So his widow has this autobiographical sketch with that anecdote told in it.
And you think she's in Queens.
Well, he used to live in Queens.
I don't know if she still lives there, but I can find out.
In fact, I would love to be here.
He was someone I admire tremendously.
In fact, when I was toying about going into the business, I went to see him in Queens.
He had ordered a book for me when I was putting out those catalogs.
And I went out there just to meet him and find out if I should go into the business.
And he told me something.
The reason why he was buying the book that I sold him, which taught me the lesson of my life in the book business.
But you'll read about it.
I think that after I transcribe this, and I read your sketch, then I'll get in touch again.
You've got a lot of wonderful things to tell me about that.
Oh, yeah?
I like the idea that you bring this weight
What's the phrase that they use now?
I can't even think of it.
Say it in French.
Can we play again?
Did you tell me why you chose the classics?
Ah, you will find out in my life.
Everything, as I said, one thing meets to another.
And do you come from a family of scholars?
Go find out where I come from.
That's all of it.
No, not at all.
So you came here as a poor kid before a new life?
Yes.
I have no education.
I didn't speak English, I didn't have a trade, and I had to find I was placed by some organization for, I think, Jewish immigrants.
I believe it, I'm not going to revisit the Haven or Moore story, but one of the reasons you were alert to his claims, you said to me, was because of it.
how hard education came to, how much you revered it.
I wonder if you could just kind of repeat that.
Well, when he said to me, when he saw, see, he wanted to see my house, the attic.
I'm just going to put this on the other side so it doesn't run out, because we're about to.